In his letters to the Corinthians, the apostle Paul outlines the only true gospel, calling it “the simplicity that is in Christ”. Notwithstanding this instruction, Paul feared that some might seek to counter the simple truths he taught, and thus he counseled the believers not to accept another Jesus and another gospel:
Paul was wary that after sharing the simple truth about God and His Son, others would come along to share a false gospel, preaching another Jesus and another Spirit. What’s more, Paul predicted that the church “might well bear with [or accept] him [the false teacher]”!

Sadly, Paul’s fear has become a reality. The vast majority of Christian churches today proclaim a trinity god. Another gospel has come in.

I implore you not to be deceived into thinking that this is a minor matter. Either the message contained within this book is the false gospel, or the doctrine of the Trinity is. Most certainly, the two beliefs couldn’t be further apart from each other. As you’ll soon discover, one teaching is based purely upon passages of plain Scripture, while the other is founded upon suppositions and speculative theories.

Friends, study carefully. There is no middle ground.

For the purpose of unraveling the Protestant perspective of the trinity, I will be using quotations from leaders of the Seventh-day Adventist Church, and at times comparing these statements with those from the Roman Catholic Church. To begin, we find that the Adventist Church defines the trinity as follows:
There isn’t a single verse in the Bible which teaches that God is a unity of three co-eternal persons. On the contrary, the Bible declares:
Interestingly, Jesus was once asked by a scribe: “Which is the first [greatest] commandment of all?” (Mark 12:28). As was often His custom, the Lord answered by quoting from the Old Testament Scriptures. Yet notice which passage Jesus references in answer to this question:
In answer to the question, “Which is the first commandment of all?” Jesus recalls Deuteronomy 6:4, underlining the importance of believing in one God. In his letter to the Corinthians, the apostle

Paul clearly outlines who that one God is:
Paul plainly declares that there is “one God, the Father”. This is reiterated in his letter to the Ephesians, where he states:
By comparing John 17:3 with Mark 12:29, it becomes abundantly clear that when Jesus quoted the Shema of Israel (“Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is one Lord”), He was referring to His Father; “the only true God”.

The Father is the source of all life, including the life of His Son ( John 5:26). This is why Jesus is called the “only begotten Son of God” ( John 3:18). He is equal with God in nature. And the Bible tells us that the Father created all things through His Son (Ephesians 3:9, Hebrews 1:2). Furthermore, the Bible repeatedly explains that the Holy Spirit is the personal presence of the Father and Son. (Romans 8:9, Galatians 4:6, John 20:22, John 14:23.) It is their Spirit, and not a mysterious, third being.

In spite of these statements, Gordon Jensen—a leading theologian from Andrews’ University—writes:
Jensen’s words mark the orthodox teaching of the Seventh-day Adventist Church. And through this statement alone, Jen- sen and the Adventist Church are declaring that there is no Father and Son. Rather, they propose that “one of the divine Beings accepted, and entered into the role of the Father, another the role of the Son”. Furthermore, in Pr Max Hatton’s Understanding the Trinity, we read:
A metaphor is a symbol, a figure of speech, an image, or an allegory. In essence, it’s not real. For once you teach three co-eternals, you cannot believe in a real Father and Son. It’s for this reason that the SDA Church teaches that the Father-Son relationship is a roleplay; only to “be understood in a metaphorical sense”.

However, in holding to this teaching, trinitarians are forced to reject plain passages of Scripture spoken by Christ Himself, and even those spoken by the Father in heaven. By their rejection of the simple gospel, they’re forced to introduce another gospel.

Please review the aforementioned statements made by Adventist church leaders. No scriptural evidence is supplied. When one is making these types of statements—which are being distributed worldwide—solid scriptural support must be shown, and that which does not contradict other Scripture!

Further, when you’re told that the Father-Son relationship is metaphorical, that Jesus isn’t literally the Son, and that He doesn’t have a literal Father, remember who’s speaking in John 3:16. We often forget that these are the very words of Christ, and that this is the gospel which has to transcend to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. The gospel that even a child can understand! Surely, you don’t need a theologian to tell you what “only begotten” means. It’s a simple, self-explanatory truth. Consider the following exceptionally plain passages:
The Bible teaches that to know God is to love Him, and one comes to love God by believing in who He is and what He’s done for them. Friends, God sent His only begotten Son into the world to save you. Not someone playing the role of a Son. Not a metaphor. His only begotten Son.
These are all plain statements. They are not metaphors, and neither are they symbolic. In fact, God sought to make it so clear that He spoke twice from heaven concerning this very point. The Father’s voice is recorded only three times in the entire New Testament, and for two of those times, He testifies that Jesus is His beloved Son. Notice the words He speaks at Christ’s baptism:
I don’t think people realize how serious it is to call God the Father and His Son a metaphor. Remember, this is God the Father that’s speaking. Are we going to say that His words are not to be taken literally? How else is one supposed to understand a voice from heaven saying: “This is my beloved Son”? Simply look to the mount of transfiguration where Christ was glorified before Peter, James, and John:
Lying at the very core of the gospel is the Father’s gift to humanity; the gift of His only begotten Son as the atonement for our sins. But what is the mainstream church teaching in regard to this precious truth?

Today, Trinitarians declare that the Father-Son relationship is metaphorical. That it wasn’t literally God’s Son who was sent to die. And it wasn’t literally the Father who sent him, but one who “entered into the role of the Father, [and] another the role of the Son.”5

By this teaching, theologians are undermining the infinite sacrifice of God and His Son, and are concealing the great love which the Father has expressed toward you and me.

What’s more, the doctrine of the trinity fails to provide one verse as evidence for a metaphorical Father and Son. Yet Christ, the Father, and the apostles each testify of the same truth: the Father and Son are not metaphors.
How does Satan prevent us from seeing the love of God? Through a trinity doctrine. A doctrine which dismembers the core of the gospel and the very hope of man’s salvation. In John 3:36, we find clear conditions for man’s access to everlasting life:
By asserting a metaphorical Father and Son, the Trinity denies that Jesus is the only begotten Son of God. Conversely, our salvation depends upon us accepting this very fact!
Here is a challenge. If you believe that God is a unity of three co-eternal persons, then provide one verse of Scripture to support this definition. As a surety, you won’t find a single text. Theologians know there’s no Scripture to support their teaching. Yet still, they insist that the Father-Son relationship is metaphori- cal; merely a role-play.

The truth about God is intricately connected with how greatly He loves mankind. However, through the trinity doctrine, ministers of the gospel seek to make God a liar:
That’s how far Scripture goes in appealing to us to accept this beautiful truth. If you don’t believe “the record that God gave of his Son”, you make God a liar. Of course, we know that God cannot lie. So why is it so hard to believe His plain, loving words: “And lo a voice from heaven, saying, Mis is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased”? (Matthew 3:17).
Can you see how vitally important this truth is? Jesus declares that His church is built upon it and “the gates of hell shall not prevail against it”. It’s for this reason that the Trinity destroys the very foundation of God’s church! It denies that Jesus is truly the Son of God, and therefore denies the words of the Father, the confessions of the apostles, and the promises of Jesus Christ.

Remember, Trinitarians teach that the Son is only a metaphor. Hence, according to this teaching, the entire Christian church is built upon something that is not real. Amazing! The greatest truth in the Bible—a truth so solid that Jesus calls it the rock upon which He will build His church—is, according to the trinitarian, only a metaphor.

By contrast, consider how much importance the apostle Peter placed upon the Sonship of Christ. In 2 Peter 1, we read the final will and testimony of this dedicated apostle. As Peter is about to die, there’s one thing on his mind that he wants others to remember:
Here, we see what Peter’s faith was built upon. Just before his martyrdom, Peter records the single most important truth for the church to hold onto. Think about it: this is the apostle who walked with Jesus from the beginning of His ministry. He could have written about Christ’s miracles, His teachings, the upper-room experience, the cross, His resurrection, or Pentecost. Yet an aged Peter who is about to die pens for us the most vital truth of Christ’s entire ministry. He, along with James and John, saw Jesus transfigured and heard the Father’s voice saying: “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased”. Indeed, Peter’s final words are an earnest confession, to which he adds: “And this voice which came from heaven we heard.”

Friends, who are you going to believe? The words of the Father Himself? Or the words of church leaders who deny a literal Father and Son? Notice who it is that denies the Father and Son:
John affirms that it’s the spirit of antichrist which denies the Father and Son. It comes from Rome. And Rome, from Babylon.
Both beliefs are false. Both deny that Jesus is the only begotten Son of God. And both deny that the Holy Spirit is the personal Spirit of the Father and Son. The second belief—which we are dealing with—is most verily a Roman Catholic teaching. In the Compendium of the Catechism of the Catholic Church, we read:
How can anyone read the above comparisons and not acknowledge that the trinity of the SDA Church is the same trinity as that of Rome? For further evidence, consider the Athanasian Creed, which originated in approximately 500 AD. This creed—cherished by Catholicism—provides a thorough description of the doctrine of the trinity. It states:
Now, compare this creed with the fundamental beliefs of the Adventist Church. What does the SDA Church proclaim?
Likewise, commenting on the Athanasian Creed in his book Understanding the Trinity, Max Hatton states: “this formula has served Christians well for about two millennia.”
In 1 Corinthians 8:6, we find a simple yet remarkable statement. Here, the apostle Paul proclaims that there is “one God; the Father, of whom are all things”. Paul certainly wasn’t an advocate of ‘one- god-in-three-persons’.

Furthermore, in John 17:3, we’re shown Christ’s prayer for humanity. Rest assured, this prayer is not symbolic. Neither is it figurative. They are simply the words of the Son in communion with His Father:
Here, Jesus declares the exact same message that Paul shares in 1 Corinthians 8:6. And in Ephesians 4:6, we find harmony again:
As surely as the Father is the one true God, Jesus Christ is His only begotten Son. In Proverbs 30:4, Solomon ponders the days of creation, and asks:
Here, the wisest man who’s ever lived points to God’s Son as being a Son before creation. Not a Son merely at Bethlehem, but a Son who existed before the Earth was made. And the prophet Isaiah declares:
This prophecy is the John 3:16 of the Old Testament. The child who was born in Bethlehem is the Son who was given “unto us”. The only begotten Son of God.
In order for the Father to send His Son into the world, Jesus had to be a Son before Bethlehem. This is exactly what the following text reveals:

Once again, we see that Jesus was a Son before Bethlehem, and it was this Son who was sent down from heaven. John also declares:
Today, many are denying what these verses truly mean. They refuse to accept that Jesus is literally the Son of God. For this reason, God (in his mercy) makes it incredibly plain:
So far, we’ve seen perfect harmony throughout the Old and New Testaments that God sent His only begotten Son into the world. Then, to allow no room for doubt, Scripture states: “Truly, this man was the Son of God”! However, if you still refuse to believe that Jesus is truly God’s begotten Son, take careful note of John 3:18:
The Bible repeatedly admonishes us that our eternal life depends upon us knowing the Father and Son:
When Jesus calls the Father “the only true God”, He means what He says. Yet, like Catholic Rome, Protestant leaders are proclaiming the exact opposite of what Christ has made incredibly plain. Notice again these statements from the Adventist Church and the Church of Rome:
The Bible states that the Father is the only true God. Yet both the Adventist and Catholic churches declare that God is an essence of three distinct persons. By contrast, Paul asserts:

The reason why the Father is the only true God is because the Father is the originator of all things. He is the sovereign of the universe. All things came from God, including His Son. At this point, you may be asking: Isn’t Jesus our creator? This is true. Yet take a closer look at what Paul is teaching:
Yes, Jesus created all things. That is true. But the deeper truth is that the Father created all things through His Son. Furthermore, as Hebrews 1:2 points out, Jesus was God’s Son at the time when He created the worlds! That’s exactly what Solomon states in Proverbs 30:4:
Jesus was God’s Son long before He became a Son in Bethlehem. This is firmly established through the Old Testament prophecies:
Nevertheless, the question of when Jesus was begotten—throughout the ages of eternity—remains a mystery beyond our comprehension.

Now, you may be wondering; doesn’t Jesus possess eternal life of Himself? Again, this is true. But from whence did He receive His eternal life?
Jesus received His life from the Father. And what type of life does the Father have? Eternal life. Divine life. The life that the Father gave to His Son is not the life of humanity, but of everlasting Divinity! That’s the reason He is a creator, and the reason He possesses eternal life. In the next chapter, we will consider how Christ received that Divine, eternal life.
It was by inheritance that Christ received the Divine life of His Father! Indeed, Jesus received by inheritance a more excellent name than the angels. A divine name. Remember Christ’s words in the epistle of John:
To further illustrate the life which Christ inherited from His Father, consider the following chart which focuses on a human father-son relationship:

In this instance, is the son any less human than his father? No. The son inherited the very nature of his father from birth. They are identical in nature. Yet, could the son have existed without the father? No, certainly not. For the son received his life from his father!
Bearing this principle in mind, consider the relationship that exists between our heavenly Father and His only begotten Son as highlighted by the following table:

In this instance, is the Son any less Divine than the Father? No. Jesus inherited the very nature of His Father from birth. A Divine nature. And take note that God the Father also has a physical nature. Daniel saw the Ancient of days sitting upon a throne “whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool” (Daniel 7:9). Isaiah saw him seated high and lifted up, as the “train [of his robe] filled the temple” (Isaiah 6:1). And John also saw him, as the “one [who] sat on the throne” (Revelation 4:2). Unquestionably, God the Father has a physical nature. He’s not an essence. And He had a Son. Bible commentator Ellet Joseph Waggoner aptly writes:
While we cannot measure the length of Christ’s divine life before the incarnation, we are to accept His declaration that He came forth from God:
Friends, from this verse alone, we can see that the Father and Son are not co-eternal beings, as fundamental belief #2 would have you believe. On the contrary, Jesus is telling us that He “proceeded forth and came from God”!

The word “proceeded” means to be born, to issue forth from. It doesn’t mean to merely be sent. Jesus was born of God. In the ages of eternity, Christ had a beginning. Yet, does that make Jesus a lesser God? Certainly not. Jesus inherited the very Divinity of God the Father!

Indeed, Jesus Christ is God. The Bible is filled with passages that denote just that:
Yes, Jesus is God. However, there is a deeper truth. Scripture also teaches that Jesus Himself has a God and Father. The disciples declare:
What perfect harmony! The disciples, Jesus, and the Father Himself all testify that Jesus has a God and Father.

Friends, if God were a trinity, the truths we’ve just read would be blasphemy, for the trinity teaches a unity of three co-eternal and co-equal divine beings. Yet these inspired verses all teach that although Jesus is rightly called God, He Himself has a God and Father.

The same Paul who declares that “Jesus Christ is Lord” (Philip- pians 2:11) also testifies that “there is but one God, the Father” (1 Corinthians 8:6). Are you going to charge the apostle Paul with believing in two gods? Paul also said this about Jesus:
What a powerful testament! Christ is called both “the image of the invisible God”, and “the firstborn” of every creature. Now notice what the Greek Lexicon says in relation to this verse:
Colossians 1:15 teaches us that while Christ is equal with God (for He is the image of the invisible God), He came into being through God (as the firstborn of all creation). That’s why Paul states that “to us, there is but one God, the Father”. It’s because the Father is the originator of all life! So why is Christ called “Lord”, you ask? It is because Christ was truly begotten of the Father, and thereby inherited His exact Divine nature.

Furthermore, in Hebrews 1:6, the apostle Paul calls Jesus “the first- begotten” who was brought into the world, just as John declares in 1 John 4:9. Yet surprisingly, some brethren still claim that Christ was a Son from Bethlehem only.

What’s more, the same brethren who teach that a co-eternal being took the role of a Son at Bethlehem claim that this role was purely for the working out of the plan of salvation. Yet notice what 1 Corinthians 15:28 says about the Son once the plan of salvation is complete:
From the days before creation, to the future heavenly Jerusalem, Christ will always be God’s only begotten Son. And lovingly, willingly, He will subject Himself to His Father’s will.

As we saw earlier, Jesus is rightly called God. However, the Bible also teaches that Jesus Himself has a God and Father. Thus, God is not a mysterious, indivisible essence of three co-eternals. Rather, God the Father had a Son, and by nature, the Son inherited the Divinity of His Father.

Please understand this point. The Divinity of God is the Spirit of God. There is only one Divinity, and therefore only one Spirit. God the Father is the original source of this Divinity, as His titles vividly point out:
In Mark 5:7, it’s demons who are speaking. Satan knows who the Most High God is. And even the devils acknowledge that Christ is truly the “Son of the Most High God”! Indeed, the devils believe and acknowledge this truth, while the trinitarian teaches:
The following table outlines the doctrine of the trinity, in light of the statements previously given.

According to trinitarians, ‘god the Son’—a term not once recorded in the Holy Bible—is the source of his own divinity. He is co-eternal with the other two persons. Therefore, he is without beginning, and his sonship is only a metaphor; a role-play.

The moment one believes in the trinity and its term ‘god the son’, they must acknowledge that they believe in two gods. Why? Because the trinitarian denies that ‘god the son’ had a beginning. They teach that he is divine and has always existed. Therefore, by being unrelated to the Father, he bears his own separate divinity. This makes two divinities, or two gods! This objection cannot be answered.

To make matters worse, the trinitarian then believes in god the Spirit; a third divine co-eternal person. This leaves us with three individual god beings. This is a polytheistic religion. It truly is another gospel.

So far, we’ve seen that the Father is the “only true God” and that Jesus Christ is “the only begotten Son of the Father”. Now let’s see how the Bible describes the Holy Spirit:
Where did the Holy Spirit come from? John says: “he [Christ] breathed on them”. It’s Christ’s own breath. The Holy Spirit came from inside Him!

The Holy Spirit is not a third co-eternal person. Christ breathed on His disciples and said: “receive ye the Holy Ghost”. It’s a most beautiful illustration because it’s practical. And this is the same Spirit we find in the story of creation:

Some people interpret this to mean that the Holy Spirit—a third divine being—was moving upon the waters. But the verse states that it was “the Spirit of God” which moved upon the waters. How does David describe the Spirit in creation?
The word literally means “breath”. So, what was it that moved upon the face of the waters? “The breath of his mouth”. It was Christ’s breath—His spoken word—which moved upon the waters:

Therefore, the Spirit of God is the spoken word of God. It’s not another being. In fact, the Holy Spirit is described as being the personal presence of God and Christ. Consider the following passages:
The Holy Spirit is the Spirit of God. It’s His presence and His word. It’s not somebody else. In the following parallel statements, we discover that the Spirit of God is also the mind of God:
So, the Holy Spirit is God’s word, His presence, and His mind. And it’s the Spirit of God and Christ that speaks through the disciples, as the following verses illustrate:
Ultimately, the Holy Spirit is the breath, presence, mind, right hand of power (Divinity), and eyes of the Lord. It’s for this reason that the Spirit is called the:
Certainly, the word “of ” is possessive. The Spirit belongs to God. It’s not somebody else. Notice the following passage from the book of Daniel:
One wouldn’t read the phrase “his spirit was troubled”, and think that somebody else was troubled. It was Nebuchadnezzar’s mind that was troubled! We have no difficulty in accepting this. So why, then, when we read the phrase: “the Spirit of God”, do we feel the need to detach the Spirit and turn it into a third person? This is exactly what the Trinity does, as Pastor Max Hatton clearly states:
The trinity teaches that the Holy Spirit is someone else. Now, let’s examine John 14:16-17; the passage which Pr Hatton is referring to in the previous quote.
Speaking of the Comforter, which would come at Pentecost, Jesus says to His disciples: “ye know him”. How did they know Him? “For he dwelleth with you”.

The Comforter wasn’t a stranger. He was dwelling with the disciples at that very moment. He’d been living with them, eating with them, and traveling with them. He was with them in the present tense. That’s why Jesus tells the disciples that “ye know him”. In the very next verse, Jesus plainly identifies who the Comforter is:
Jesus says: “I will come to you”. It is “I”, who am already dwelling with you. “I”, whom you already know. Does this sound like somebody else taking His place? Jesus continues:
The disciples understood who the Comforter was. The disciples believed Him when He promised: “I will come to you”. They simply wanted to learn by what means He would come. Notice the conversation that takes place between Jesus and the disciples:
Christ was leaving the disciples physically, but He was coming to dwell with them spiritually. That’s why the world wouldn’t recognize Him, but those who knew Him personally would. The very love, joy, and peace that the disciples had experienced with Jesus in person, was to abide with them still through His Spirit. Christ’s promise was this:
Friends, hold fast to the promises of Jesus Christ. Remember the last words He spoke to His church. His parting promise to you is this:
As Christ was ascending up to heaven, He wanted to assure His followers that He would remain with them. He wasn’t sending someone else to take His place. He says: “I am with you alway, [even] unto the end of the world”.

Friends, this is the Comforter who is with us right now. Not some mysterious being that we do not know, who never partook of our humanity, and can never understand the trials that we face each day. No. The Comforter is someone who walked this Earth for thirty-three and a half years, who met every trial and temptation “as is common to man” (1 Corinthians 10:13), and who learnt “obedi- ence by the things which He suffered” (Hebrews 5:8). It is He who has become “the author and finisher of our faith” (Hebrews 12:2). It is He who promises:
Throughout this study, we’ve learned that there is only one true God; the Father. We’ve also learned that Jesus is His only begotten Son, born in the express image of the Father’s person, and in all His brightness and glory. Finally, we’ve seen that the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of God and Christ. This is the true gospel. The gospel that is given “for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ:” (Ephesians 4:12). And it’s this gospel which will bring us into the “unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man” (Ephesians 4:13).

This is what Paul calls “the simplicity that is in Christ” (2 Corinthians 11:3). It is our privilege to confess with Peter and the apostles: