Sufficient commentary has already been provided regarding the fourth beast (Rome) and the ten horns, or ten kingdoms, that emerged from this power. Our focus now shifts to the little horn, which warrants closer examination. As previously mentioned in the commentary on verse 8, the fulfillment of the prophecy concerning this horn is found in the rise and work of the papacy. Consequently, it is both intriguing and significant to investigate the causes that led to the development of this presumptuous power.
The initial pastors, or bishops, of Rome received a degree of respect befitting the status of the city in which they resided. For the first few centuries of the Christian Era, Rome stood as the largest, wealthiest, and most influential city in the world. It served as the center of empire and the capital of nations. Julian proclaimed, "All the inhabitants of the earth belong to her," while Claudian deemed her the "fountain of laws. " The Roman pastors reasoned, "If Rome is the queen of cities, why should not her pastor be the king of bishops? Why should not the Roman Church be the mother of Christendom? Why should not all nations be her children, and her authority their sovereign law?" According to D'Aubigne, from whom we derive these quotations, it was not difficult for ambitious men to adopt this line of reasoning, and ambitious Rome did just that.
Bishops throughout the Roman Empire took pleasure in bestowing upon the bishop of Rome a portion of the honor their city received from the world's nations. At the outset, this tribute did not imply dependence. "However," D'Aubigne continues, "usurped power grows like an avalanche. Admonitions, initially fraternal in nature, soon transformed into absolute commands from the pontiff. The Western bishops supported this encroachment by the Roman pastors, either out of jealousy of the Eastern bishops or because they preferred to submit to the supremacy of a pope rather than the authority of a temporal power". These influences surrounded the bishop of Rome, propelling him swiftly toward the spiritual dominance of Christendom.
Challenge of Arianism. The fourth century was fated to see an obstacle obstruct the path of this ambitious vision. The prophecy had foretold that the power symbolized by the little horn would "subdue three kings. " In the rise and spread of Arianism at the beginning of the fourth century and the challenge it posed to papal supremacy, we find the catalysts that prompted the papal power to uproot three of the kingdoms of Western Rome.
Arius, a parish priest from the ancient and influential church of Alexandria, disseminated his doctrine worldwide, sparking a fierce debate within the Christian church. Consequently, a general council was convened at Nicaea by Emperor Constantine in AD 325 to examine and rule upon its teachings. Arius argued "that the Son was totally and essentially distinct from the Father; that He was the first and noblest of those beings whom the Father had created out of nothing, the instrument by whose subordinate operation the Almighty Father formed the universe, and therefore inferior to the Father, both in nature and dignity. " This view was condemned by the council, which declared that Christ was of the same substance as the Father. Arius was subsequently exiled to Illyria, and his followers were forced to accept the creed formulated during that gathering.
However, the controversy was not so easily resolved. For centuries, it continued to unsettle the Christian world, with Arians becoming ardent adversaries of the pope and the Roman Catholic Church. The proliferation of Arianism threatened to impede the progress of Catholicism, and it was clear that Italy and its illustrious capital under the control of a people with Arian beliefs would be detrimental to the supremacy of a Catholic bishop. Nevertheless, the prophecy had asserted that this horn, symbolizing the papacy, would ascend to paramount power and, in achieving this status, would subdue three kings.

There has been some debate concerning the specific powers that were vanquished by the papacy during its ascent to power. In this context, Albert Barnes' observations appear relevant: "In the chaos that ensued following the dissolution of the Roman Empire and the incomplete accounts of the events transpiring during the rise of the papal power, it would not be surprising if it were difficult to find events explicitly documented that, in all respects, would be an accurate and absolute realization of the vision. Nevertheless, it is possible to discern the fulfillment of this prophecy with a fair degree of certainty in the history of the papacy. "
Joseph Mede postulates that the three kingdoms overthrown were the Greeks, Lombards, and Franks; Sir Isaac Newton, on the other hand, proposes they were the Exarchate of Ravenna, the Lombards, and the Senate and Dukedom of Rome. Thomas Newton raises significant objections to both of these propositions. The Franks could not have been one of these kingdoms, as they were never overthrown. The Lombards could not have been one, as they were never subjugated to the popes. Furthermore, Albert Barnes states, "I do not find, indeed, that the Kingdom of the Lombards was, as is commonly stated, among the number of the temporal sovereignties that became subject to the authority of the popes. " The Senate and Dukedom of Rome could not have been one, as they never constituted one of the ten kingdoms, three of which were to be overthrown before the little horn.
The primary difficulty in the interpretations offered by these eminent commentators may have arisen from their supposition that the prophecy concerning the exaltation of the papacy had not been fulfilled and could not have been until the pope became a temporal prince. As a result, they sought to find a realization of the prophecy in the events leading to the pope's temporal sovereignty. However, the prophecy in verses 24 and 25 seemingly refers not to the pope's civil power, but to his authority to dominate the minds and consciences of individuals. The papacy achieved this position in AD 538, as will be demonstrated later.
The term "before" used in verses 8 and 20 represents the Chaldee word qadam, with the root meaning "front. " When combined with min, meaning "from," as it is in these two verses, Davidson translates it as "from the presence of," and Gesenius asserts that it is equivalent to the Hebrew term lipna, meaning "in the presence of. " Thus, it has the meaning of "before" in the sense of "place," as it does in the same phrase in verse 10, where it is appropriately translated in the Authorized Version as "from before Him. " In verse 8, we see the image of the little horn forcing its way among the ten and aggressively uprooting three horns from before it. In verse 20, it is declared that the three horns "fell" from before it, as if conquered by it. In verse 24, we read that another king, representing the little horn, "shall subdue three kings [horns]," evidently by acts of force. While the word qadam is also used in the sense of time, as in the word "before" in verse 7, it is scarcely doubtful that it is used in the sense of place in the three verses mentioned above. Edward Elliott evidently concurs with this interpretation.
It is posited with confidence that the three powers, or horns, uprooted were the Heruli, the Vandals, and the Ostrogoths, and this position is anchored in reliable historical data. Odoacer, the leader of the Heruli, was the first barbarian to reign over the Romans. He seized the throne of Italy in AD 476. Regarding his religious beliefs, Gibbon states: "Like the rest of the barbarians, he had been instructed in the Arian heresy; but he revered the monastic and episcopal characters, and the silence of the Catholics attests to the toleration which they enjoyed. "
Gibbon further notes: "The Ostrogoths, the Burgundians, the Suevi, and the Vandals, who had listened to the eloquence of the Latin clergy, preferred the more intelligible lessons of their domestic teachers; and Arianism was adopted as the national faith of the warlike converts who were seated on the ruins of the Western Empire. This irreconcilable difference of religion was a perpetual source of jealousy and hatred, and the reproach of barbarian was embittered by the more odious epithet of heretic. The heroes of the north, who had submitted with some reluctance to believe that all their ancestors were in hell, were astonished and exasperated to learn that they themselves had only changed the mode of their eternal condemnation. "

The Arian doctrine significantly impacted the church at the time, as evident in the following excerpt: "The entire immense Gothic population that descended upon the Roman Empire, insofar as it was Christian at all, adhered to the faith of the Alexandrian heretic. Our first Teutonic version of the Scriptures was by an Arian missionary, Ulfilas. The first conqueror of Rome, Alaric, the first conqueror of Africa, Genseric, were Arians. Theodoric the Great, king of Italy, and hero of the 'Nibelungenlied,' was an Arian. The empty space in his grand tomb at Ravenna bears witness to the vengeance that the Orthodox exacted upon his memory when they triumphed and tore down the porphyry vase in which his Arian subjects had enshrined his ashes. "
Ranke remarks: "However, the church inevitably encountered numerous difficulties and found herself in a completely altered situation. A pagan people took possession of Britain; Arian kings seized the majority of the remaining West; while the Lombards, long adherents of Arianism and dangerous and hostile neighbors, established a powerful sovereignty on the very doorstep of Rome. Meanwhile, the Roman bishops, surrounded on all sides, exerted themselves with the prudence and persistence that have remained their distinguishing traits, to regain control at least in their patriarchal diocese. " 
Machiavelli observes: "It is worth noting that almost all the wars which the northern barbarians waged in Italy were incited by the pontiffs, and the hordes that inundated the country were generally summoned by them. "
The relationship between these Arian kings and the pope is demonstrated in the following testimony from Mosheim's church history:
"On the other hand, it is certain, from various highly credible records, that both the emperors and the nations in general were far from willing to bear patiently the yoke of servitude that the see of Rome was imperiously imposing upon the Christian church. The Gothic princes set limits to the power of the bishop of Rome in Italy, allowed no one to ascend the pontificate without their approval, and reserved for themselves the right to judge the legality of each new election. " 
An instance substantiating this statement appears in the history of Odoacer, the first Arian king mentioned above. Upon Pope Simplicius' death in AD 483, the clergy and people assembled to elect a new pope. Suddenly, Basilius, Odoacer's lieutenant, arrived at the assembly, expressed surprise that they would undertake the appointment of a successor to the deceased pope without him, declared in the king's name that all that had been done was null and void, and ordered the election to start anew.
At the same time, Zeno, the Eastern Emperor and friend of the pope, was eager to drive Odoacer out of Italy, a task he soon saw accomplished without his intervention. Theodoric had ascended the throne of the Ostrogothic kingdom in Moesia and Pannonia. Being on amicable terms with Zeno, he wrote to him, explaining that it was impossible to contain his Goths within the impoverished province of Pannonia, and requested permission to lead them to a more favorable region to conquer and inhabit. Zeno granted him permission to march against Odoacer and take possession of Italy. Consequently, after a five-year war, the Herulian kingdom in Italy was overthrown, Odoacer was treacherously murdered, and Theodoric established his Ostrogoths in the Italian peninsula. As previously mentioned, he was an Arian, and the law of Odoacer subjecting the election of the pope to the approval of the king remained in effect.

This particular episode demonstrates the extent to which the papacy was subject to the Arian king's authority. In AD 523, with the Catholics in the East persecuting the Arians, Theodoric summoned Pope John and commanded him: "'If the emperor [Justin, the predecessor of Justinian] does not deem it appropriate to revoke the edict against those of my persuasion [i.e., the Arians], I shall issue a similar edict against those of his [i.e., the Catholics] and ensure its rigorous enforcement. Those who do not embrace the faith of Nice are heretics to him, and those who do, heretics to me. Whatever excuses or justifies his severity towards the former will do the same for mine towards the latter... I shall therefore require you to travel to Constantinople and protest, in both my name and your own, against the aggressive measures that court has so recklessly embraced. You have the power to sway the emperor's decisions, and until you have achieved that, and the Catholics [Theodoric refers to the Arians here] are allowed to freely practice their religion and regain their churches, you must not contemplate returning to Italy.'" 
The Pope, thus expressly ordered by the Arian emperor to abstain from Italian soil until he fulfilled the king's will, could hardly aspire to any form of supremacy until that authority was removed.
The papal faction's sentiments towards Theodoric can be ascertained by the retribution exacted upon his memory. They desecrated his tomb by removing the vessel containing the ashes that his Arian followers had enshrined. Baronius eloquently expresses these feelings, denouncing Theodoric as a "cruel barbarian, a barbarous tyrant, and an impious Arian. "
Meanwhile, the Catholics in Italy experienced the constraining force of an Arian king, while enduring brutal persecution from the Arian Vandals in Africa. Elliot observes: "The Vandal kings were not only Arians but also persecutors of the Catholics; in Sardinia and Corsica under the Roman Episcopate, we may presume, as well as in Africa. "
In AD 533, Justinian embarked on his Vandal and Gothic wars, seeking the support of the Pope and the Catholic party. He issued a momentous decree to establish the Pope as the head of all churches, marking the beginning of papal supremacy in AD 538. Throughout the African and Italian campaigns, Catholics universally welcomed Belisarius, Justinian's general, and his army as their saviors.
However, such a decree could not be executed until the Arian obstructions were removed. A turning point occurred when the military campaigns in Africa and Italy saw Belisarius' victorious legions deliver a decisive blow to Arianism, resulting in its ultimate defeat.
Procopius recounts that Justinian initiated the African war to alleviate the plight of the Christians (Catholics). Despite the palace prefect's near success in dissuading him, a dream encouraged Justinian to proceed, assuring him that by aiding the Christians, he would topple the Vandals' power.
Mosheim states: "The Greeks, who had adopted the decrees of the Council of Nice [i.e., the Catholics], persecuted and oppressed the Arians wherever they could exert their influence and authority. Conversely, the Nicenians suffered harsh treatment from their adversaries [the Arians], particularly in Africa and Italy, where they acutely experienced the Arian power and its bitter retribution. Nevertheless, Arianism's triumphs were fleeting, and its prosperous days were wholly eclipsed when the Vandals were expelled from Africa and the Goths from Italy by Justinian's forces. "
Elliot summarizes this period by identifying three prominent adversaries that were vanquished to pave the way for the Pope: "I might cite three that were eradicated from before the pope out of the list first given, the Heruli under Odoacer, the Vandals, and the Ostrogoths. " 