Upon examining the historical testimonies aforementioned, we find it irrefutable that the three horns plucked up were the powers delineated as the Heruli in AD 493, the Vandals in 534, and ultimately the Ostrogoths in 553. Nevertheless, the latter's effective opposition to Justinian's decree waned when they were expelled from Rome by Belisarius in 583.
The prophecy of the Little Horn, foretelling that it would "Speak Great Words Against the Most High," has been regrettably realized throughout the chronicles of the pontiffs. They have either sought or allowed the attribution of titles so hyperbolic and blasphemous that even celestial beings would pale in comparison.
Lucius Ferraris, in his Prompta Bibliotheca, which the Catholic Encyclopedia extols as "a veritable encyclopedia of religious knowledge" and "a precious mine of information," proclaims in its article on the pope that "the pope is of so great dignity and so exalted that he is not a mere man, but as it were God, and the vicar of God... The pope alone is deservedly called by the name 'most holy,' because he alone is the vicar of Christ, who is the fountain and source and fullness of all holiness... 'He is likewise the divine monarch and supreme emperor, and king of kings.' Hence the pope is crowned with a triple crown, as king of heaven and of earth and of the lower regions... The pope is, as it were, God on earth, sole sovereign of the faithful of Christ, chief king of kings, having plenitude of power, to whom has been entrusted by the omnipotent God direction not only of the earthly but also of the heavenly kingdom... The pope is of so great authority and power that he can modify, explain, or interpret even divine laws."
During the fourth session of the fifth Lateran Council, Christopher Marcellus, in an oration to the Pope, proclaimed, "Thou are the shepherd, thou art the physician, thou art the director, thou art the husbandman; finally, thou art another God on earth." 
Adam Clarke further elaborates on verse 25: "'He shall speak as if he were God.' So St. Jerome quotes from Symmachus. To none can this apply so well or so fully as to the popes of Rome. They have assumed infallibility, which belongs only to God. They profess to forgive sins, which belongs only to God. They profess to open and shut heaven, which belongs only to God. They profess to be higher than all the kings of the earth, which belongs only to God. And they go beyond God in pretending to loose whole nations from their oath of allegiance to their kings, when such kings do not please them. And they go against God when they give indulgences for sin. This is the worst of all blasphemies." 
Regarding the prophecy of the Little Horn, "to wear out the Saints of the Most High," only cursory historical inquiry is needed to demonstrate that Rome, during the eras of antiquity and the Dark Ages, relentlessly pursued a path of destruction against the church of God. Ample evidence attests to the fact that prior to and after the monumental Reformation, wars, crusades, massacres, inquisitions, and all manner of persecutions were employed to subjugate all to the Roman yoke.


The chronicles of medieval persecution are harrowing and distressing, causing a reluctance to dwell upon the intricate details. However, to properly comprehend this passage, it is imperative to revisit some events that transpired during these woeful times. Albert Barnes, in his commentary on this passage, observes:
"Can anyone doubt that this is true of the papacy? The Inquisition, the 'persecutions of the Waldenses;' the ravages of the Duke of Alva; the fires of Smithfield; the tortures at Goa indeed, the whole history of the papacy may be appealed to in proof that this is applicable to that power... Indeed, the slightest acquaintance with the history of the papacy will convince anyone that what is here said of 'making war with the saints' (verse 21), and 'wearing out the saints of the Most High' (verse 25), is strictly applicable to that power and will accurately describe its history." 
These accounts are corroborated by the testimony of W. E. H. Lecky, who asserts:
"That the Church of Rome has shed more innocent blood than any other institution that has ever existed among mankind, will be questioned by no Protestant who has a complete knowledge of history... These atrocities were not perpetrated in the brief paroxysms of a reign of terror or by the hands of obscure sectaries but were inflicted by a triumphant church, with every circumstance of solemnity and deliberation." 
The fact that victims were frequently handed over to civil authorities does not absolve the church of responsibility. The church presided over decisions concerning heresy and then transferred the offenders to the secular court. In those times, however, secular power was merely an instrument wielded by the church, under its control and at its behest. When the church delivered prisoners to the executioners, it employed the following formula with fiendish sarcasm: "And we do leave and deliver thee to the secular arm, and to the power of the secular court; but at the same time do most earnestly beseech that court so to moderate its sentence as not to touch thy blood, or to put thy life in any danger."
Subsequently, as intended, the hapless victims of papal animosity were swiftly executed.
Lepicier's testimony is pertinent in this context: "The civil power can only punish the crime of unbelief in the manner and to the extent that the crime is judicially made known to it by ecclesiastical persons, skilled in the doctrine of the faith... But the church taking cognizance by herself of the crime of unbelief can by herself decree the sentence of death, yet not execute it; but she hands over the execution of it to the secular arm."
The spurious claims propagated by some Catholics, asserting that their church has never executed dissenters, have been categorically refuted by one of their own eminent writers, Cardinal Bellarmine, who was born in Tuscany in 1542. Nearly canonized as a saint posthumously in 1621, Bellarmine's contributions to the church were substantial. During a debate, he inadvertently admitted the truth. Responding to Luther's assertion that the church (referring to the true church) never burned heretics, Bellarmine, interpreting it as referring to the Roman Catholic Church, retorted: "This argument proves not the sentiment, but the ignorance or impudence of Luther; for as almost an infinite number were either burned or otherwise put to death... for that heretics were often burned by the church, may be proved by adducing a few from many examples." 

The esteemed Alfred Baudrillart, Rector of the Catholic Institute of Paris, provides a poignant observation regarding the Church's approach to heresy. He states, "When confronted by heresy, she does not content herself with persuasion; arguments of an intellectual and moral order appear to her insufficient, and she has recourse to force, to corporal punishment, to torture." This powerful institution established tribunals such as the Inquisition, allied with state laws, and, if necessary, encouraged crusades or religious wars. All of these actions, ostensibly driven by a "horror of blood," ultimately led to the Church urging secular powers to spill it in a manner that could be deemed less frank and more odious than if the Church herself were to do so directly.
Particularly during the sixteenth century, the Church's approach to Protestants was marked by a propensity for violence. Instead of focusing on moral reform, education, or conversion through eloquent and holy missionaries, the Church was responsible for igniting the funeral pyres of the Inquisition in Italy, the Low Countries, and especially Spain. Furthermore, in France under Francis I and Henri II and in England under Mary Tudor, the Church actively tortured heretics. Throughout the latter half of the sixteenth century and the first half of the seventeenth century, the Church not only encouraged religious wars in France and Germany but actively supported them.
Pope Martin V's letter to the King of Poland during his papacy from 1417 to 1431 reveals a chilling directive: " 'Know that the interest of the Holy See, and those of your crown make it a duty to exterminate the Hussites... burn, massacre, make deserts everywhere, for nothing could be more agreeable to God, or more useful to the cause of kings, than the extermination of the Hussites.' " This directive exemplifies the Church's position on heresy: it was not to be tolerated but eradicated.
It is well documented that pagan Rome persecuted the early Christian Church, resulting in the deaths of an estimated three million Christians during the first three centuries of the Christian Era. However, early Christians prayed for the continuance of imperial Rome, as they knew that when this form of government ceased, another, far worse persecuting power would emerge, one that would "wear out the saints of the Most High," as foretold in prophecy. Pagan Rome might have slain infants while sparing mothers, but papal Rome's cruelty extended to both mothers and infants indiscriminately. No age, sex, or condition in life was safe from its merciless wrath.
The "Little Horn" was also prophesied to "think to change times and laws." The question arises: which laws and whose? Certainly not the laws of other earthly governments, for it was not unusual for one power to change the laws of another when it could exert its dominion. The times and laws in question pertain to those that this power would only think to change but would not actually have the ability to alter. These are the laws of the Most High, to whom the saints belong, those who have suffered at the hands of this power. The papacy, indeed, has even attempted this.

The papacy has taken the liberty to restructure the Decalogue, combining the first and second commandments into one, and dividing the tenth into two separate edicts. Consequently, the ninth commandment forbids coveting a neighbor's spouse, while the tenth prohibits coveting a neighbor's property, thus maintaining the total count of ten commandments. Although the complete text of the second commandment is preserved in the Roman Catholic Bible and the Roman Catechism endorsed by the Council of Trent, meticulous explanations are provided to clarify that images and likenesses, except those of God Himself, are not forbidden by this commandment, as long as they serve the sole purpose of venerating the virtues of saints and not worshipping them as deities, which is explicitly prohibited. This principle also applies to the relics of saints, such as ashes and bones, as well as representations of angels.
Regarding the fourth commandment, which is numbered as the third in the Roman Catholic Church's arrangement, the most authoritative catechism within the Church upholds the entire commandment and advocates for the meticulous observance of the Sabbath in both personal and public worship as a sacred privilege and obligation. Nevertheless, the Church argues that the specific day designated for Sabbath observance was tied to Jewish ceremonial practices, which were abolished with the advent of Christ. Justifications are subsequently provided for observing the Sabbath on the first day of the week, commonly known as Sunday.
In support of this brief account on the altering of "times and laws" by the papacy, we present evidence from the most authoritative catechism within the Roman Catholic Church. According to The Catholic Encyclopedia, "the authority of this catechism is higher than that of any other, but is, of course not on a level with that of the canons and decrees of a council."
Before quoting the text, it is important to note that within the Roman Catholic Church's governance, the canons and decrees of an ecumenical church council hold both official and supreme authority. The Council of Trent, which convened in Trent, Italy, from 1545 to 1563, is a prominent example of such a council. As this council was convened to counter the expanding influence of the Protestant Reformation and extensively addressed church doctrines and practices, it formally decreed: "The holy synod commands all bishops... [to explain the sacraments] according to the form to be prescribed by the holy synod for all the sacraments in a catechism, which bishops will take care to have faithfully translated into the vulgar tongue, and expounded to the people by the parish priests."
In compliance with this command, a catechism was composed in Latin for the Roman Catholic Church by St. Charles Borromeo and other theologians in 1566. It was published in Rome by the Vatican Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith under the title Catechismus Romanus ex decreto Sacrosancti Concilii Tridentini, jussu S. Pii V Pontificis Maximi editus, or in English, Roman Catechism according to the decree of the Sacred Council of Trent, published by order of St. Pius V, Pontifex Maximus. This work was translated into English by "Very Rev. J. Donovan, D. D., Domestic Prelate to His Holiness Gregory XVI," and published in Dublin with a preface dated June 10, 1829, bearing the title Catechism According to the Decree of the Council of Trent, edited by the command of our Most Illustrious Lord Pius the Fifth.
From the fifth edition of the Roman Catechism published in Rome in 1796, we cite the following from Donovan's English Translation, concerning the fourth (Catholic third) commandment:
"The Church of God deemed it fitting that the religious celebration of the Sabbath should be transferred to the Lord's Day [meaning Sunday]; for on this day, light first shone upon the world. Furthermore, by the resurrection of our Redeemer on that day, who opened for us the gateway to eternal life, our existence was summoned from darkness into light; hence, the Apostles wished to designate it as 'the Lord's Day.' We also find in the Sacred Scriptures that this day was revered because it marked the commencement of the world's creation, and the Holy Ghost was bestowed upon the Apostles on that day."


The papacy's declaration that the Roman Catholic Church altered the observance of the Sabbath from the seventh day, as stipulated in the Decalogue, to the first day of the week, which it mistakenly refers to as "the Lord's day" (see commentary on Revelation 1:10), is a significant matter. The Apostles are accused of initiating the change from the seventh day to the first, yet no evidence from the Scriptures is provided to support this claim. In fact, there is no such evidence to be found. All the reasons presented for this change are solely based on human and ecclesiastical conjecture.
The testimony provided above sufficiently demonstrates how the papacy has sought to change times and laws. Further details on how later Roman Catholic catechisms assert that the Church made this change, and even challenge Protestants for accepting and observing it, can be found in our commentary on the mark of the beast in Revelation 13, pages 608-612.
In order to gain a deeper understanding of this Sabbath modification, it is beneficial to examine other reasons provided by the papacy for the change, aside from the erroneous claim that it was instituted by the Apostles. The same Roman Catechism referenced earlier attempts to clarify how the Sabbath commandment differs from the others in the Decalogue:
"It is evident that the other precepts of the Decalogue pertain to the natural law, are perpetual and unchangeable; hence, although the Mosaic law has been abrogated, Christians continue to observe all commandments contained in the two tables, not because Moses mandated it, but because they align with the natural law, which compels individuals to adhere to them. However, the commandment concerning the sanctification of the Sabbath, when considered in terms of the designated time for observance, is not immutable, but subject to change, and is not a moral law, but rather a ceremonial one. It is not a fundamental tenet of natural law, for we are not naturally inclined or instructed to offer external worship to God on this specific day over any other. Instead, the Sabbath was observed by the Israelites following their liberation from Pharaoh's bondage..." 
The reader should be reminded that the Ten Commandments were inscribed by God's finger on stone tablets, whereas the ceremonial laws were documented by Moses in a book. Additionally, the Decalogue was written prior to the issuance of the ceremonial laws to Moses. Is it appropriate to accuse God of incorporating a ceremonial command within the moral laws and leave it to an audacious ecclesiastical institution to rectify this? The rationale behind observing the seventh-day Sabbath, as stated in the commandment itself, is that the Creator rested on that day and designated it as a commemoration of His creation, without any suggestion that it foreshadowed future events in Christ, to whom all ceremonial ordinances pointed.
One final excerpt from the Roman Catechism warrants attention:
"The Apostles, therefore, decided to dedicate the first of the seven days to divine worship, which they named 'the Lord's day.' St. John mentions 'the Lord's day' in his Apocalypse (Revelation 1:10), and the Apostle instructs that collections be made 'on the first day of the week' (1 Corinthians 16:2), which, as St. Chrysostom interprets, is the Lord's day, indicating that even the Lord's day was observed as a holy day in the Church."


The allegation that the Apostles altered the day of the Sabbath is not only fallacious but also presents the notion that conducting one's business affairs on the first day of the week is a reason for observing it as the Sabbath, in contradiction to God's immutable law. This quotation also unveils the reliance on the interpretations and practices of the Fathers, such as "St. Chrysostom," rather than the Scriptures themselves as evidence for the change of the Sabbath from God's law to Sunday.
It is particularly pertinent for Protestant clergy and laity to contemplate the following observation. The Roman Catechism, commissioned by Pope Pius V around the mid-sixteenth century, essentially contains every argument used by modern-day Protestants to justify the shift of the Sabbath from the seventh day to the first day of the week. Consider the following points:
They presume, without evidence, that the seventh-day Sabbath was part of the ceremonial law (despite being at the very core of the moral law inscribed by God's own finger) and therefore abolished in Christ.
They audaciously assert that the Apostles decreed the first day of the week be observed instead of the seventh, referring to John's use of the term "Lord's day" in Revelation 1:10, even though the only day God ever consecrated as holy and claimed as His own by resting on it was the seventh day of the fourth commandment.
They maintain that the Sabbath law of rest "aligns with the law of nature," necessitating a cessation of labor and a period for reflection and worship. However, they argue that the time of its observance is "susceptible to change," since, according to their reasoning, it does not "belong to the moral but ceremonial law," and was thus altered by the Apostles, the Fathers, and the Church to the first day of the week.
Their rationale for such a change includes the fact that light first shone upon the world on the first day of the week, the Resurrection of Christ occurred on that day, the Holy Spirit descended upon the Apostles on the same day of the week, and Paul advised Christians to calculate their business accounts and set aside a portion for the Lord on the first day of the week. All these reasons are of human invention and lack scriptural authority for such a change. The only reasons given by the Creator and Lord of the Sabbath are that He created the world in six days, rested on the seventh, and designated that day for holy use on the same permanent and unalterable basis as He created all other things on the other days of creation week.
Protestants may be unaware that their defense of the Sunday Sabbath employs Roman Catholic arguments from the Catechism of the Council of Trent, published in the sixteenth century. However, every argument mentioned above can be found in that work. Our plea to every Protestant is to fully break away from the papacy, adhering to the Bible and the Bible alone in both belief and practice.
The phrase "A Time and Times and the Dividing of Time" encompasses the saints, times, and laws mentioned earlier. The question then arises as to how long this power would maintain control over them. A time equates to one year, two times denote two years, and the dividing of time, or half a time, represents half a year. Thus, we have three and a half years for the duration of this power. In the context of symbolic prophecy, this time is not literal but symbolic. The subsequent inquiry concerns the period signified by the three and a half years of prophetic time. The Bible provides the principle that a day in symbolic prophecy represents a year (Ezekiel 4:6; Numbers 14:34). Following this principle, a day in symbolic prophecy represents a year (Ezekiel 4:6; Numbers 14:34). Thus, when interpreting the three and a half years of prophetic time, we must convert the symbolic days into literal years. In this case, the three and a half years, or 1260 days, translate to 1260 literal years.
Gesenius, in his examination of the Hebrew word for day, yom, remarks on its plural form: "Sometimes [yamim] signifies a definite period of time, specifically a year, as also the Syriac and Chaldean [iddan] denotes both time and year. Similarly, in English, several words signifying time, weight, and measure are also used to denote particular specified times, weights, and measures."
Applying this day-for-a-year principle to the prophetic timeframe in question, we deduce that the power described in the prophecy would hold sway over the saints, times, and laws for 1260 literal years. This interpretation aligns with other prophetic passages found in the Scriptures, such as Revelation 12:6 and 12:14, which also refer to a period of 1260 days, or years, in a symbolic context.

In 1844, the judgment commenced its divine labor within the celestial sanctuary (Verse 10). Verse 11 reveals that due to "the great words which the horn spoke," the beast met its demise. On December 8, 1854, the Pope declared the dogma of the Immaculate Conception. In 1870, Victor Emmanuel's armies stripped the Pope of his temporal authority, coinciding with the Twentieth Ecumenical Council's proclamation of papal infallibility when speaking ex cathedra — as the shepherd and teacher of all Christians defining doctrines concerning faith or morals. Despite the escalating reverence bestowed upon the Bishop of Rome by the clergy, the Pope's temporal power was utterly vanquished. Consequently, popes sequestered themselves within the Vatican's confines in Rome, akin to prisoners, until the 1929 concordat with Italy, which reinstated "his dominion" over Vatican City, a modest segment of the Eternal City.


Upon witnessing the somber and desolate tableau of the church under papal subjugation, the prophet is granted the opportunity to once again cast his gaze upon the resplendent era of the saints' repose, during which they shall inherit the kingdom, eternally liberated from all oppressive forces. In this malevolent world, beset by the tumult and tyranny of earthly governments and the abhorrent acts committed within the land, how could God's children maintain their fortitude if not for the anticipation of the divine kingdom and their Lord's return? Their unwavering conviction in the imminent fulfillment of these promises provides solace and strength.
