The series of seven trumpets is here again resumed. The second woe ended with the sixth trumpet, August 11, 1840, and the third woe occurs under the sounding of the seventh trumpet, which began in 1844. Then where are we? Behold! that is to say, mark it well, the third woe cometh quickly. The fearful scenes of the second woe are past, and we are now under the sounding of the trumpet that brings the third and last woe. Shall we now look for peace and safety, a temporal millennium, a thousand years of righteousness and prosperity on earth? Rather, let us earnestly pray the Lord to awaken a slumbering world.
From the fifteenth verse to the end of the chapter, we seem to be carried over the ground in three distinct times, from the sounding of the seventh angel to the end. In the verses here quoted, the prophet glances forward to the full establishment of the kingdom of God. Although the seventh trumpet has begun to sound, it may not yet be a fact that the great voices in heaven have proclaimed that the kingdoms of this world have become the kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ unless it is in anticipation of the speedy accomplishment of this event. But the seventh trumpet, like the preceding six, covers a period of time, and the transfer of the kingdoms from earthly powers to Him whose right it is to reign is the principal event to occur in the early years of its sounding. Hence, this event, to the exclusion of all else, here engages the mind of the prophet. In the next verse, John goes back and takes up intervening events. 
Beginning with the spontaneous outburst of revolutions in Europe in 1848, the anger of nations toward one another has been constantly increasing. Jealousy and hatred among nations have been the rule rather than the exception. Particularly has this been manifested in the two world wars of the twentieth century, when it seemed that men would be willing to annihilate whole nations in the heat of their anger. Here are the exact words of a Harvard professor: The twentieth century, so far, has been the bloodiest period and one of the most turbulent periods and therefore one of the cruelest and lest humanitarian in the history of Western civilization and perhaps in the chronicles of mankind in general. Thy Wrath Is Come. The wrath of god for the present generation is filled up in the seven last plagues (Revelation 15: 1), which consequently must be referred to and which are soon to be poured out upon the earth. The Time of the Dead, That They Should Be Judged. The great majority of the dead, that is, the wicked, are still in their graves after the visitation of the plagues and the close of the gospel age. A work of judgment, of allotting to each one the punishment due because of his sins, is carried on by the saints in conjunction with Christ during the one thousand years following the first resurrection. (1 Corinthians 6: 2; Revelation 20: 4.) Inasmuch as this judgment of the dead follows the wrath of God or the seven last plagues, it would seem necessary to refer it to the one thousand years of judgment upon the wicked, above mentioned; for the investigative judgment takes place before the plagues are poured out. Thou Shouldst Give Reward Unto Thy Servants the Prophets. These will enter upon their reward at the Second Coming of Christ, for He brings their reward with Him. (Matthew 16: 27; Revelation 22: 12.) The full reward of the saints, however, is not reached until they enter upon the possession of the new earth. (Matthew 25: 34.) Punishment of the Wicked. Shouldst destroy them which destroy the earth refers to the time when all the wicked, who have literally devastated vast regions and wantonly destroyed human life, will be forever devoured by those purifying fires from God out of heaven. (2 Peter 3: 7; Revelation 20: 9.) Thus, the seventh trumpet reaches to the end of the one thousand years. Momentous, startling, yet joyous thought! The trumpet, now sounding, sees the final destruction of the wicked and the saints clothed in glorious immortality, safely located on the earth made new. 
Once more, the prophet carries us back to the beginning of the trumpet. After the introduction of the seventh trumpet in verse 15, the first great event that comes to mind of the seer is the transfer of the kingdom from earthly to heavenly rule. God takes to Him His great power and forever crushes the rebellion of this revolted earth, establishes Christ upon His own throne, and remains Himself supreme over all. We are next referred back to the state of the nations, the judgment to fall upon them, and the final destiny of both saints and sinners. (Verse 18.) After this field of vision has been scanned, our attention is called back once more in the verse now under notice to the close of the priesthood of Christ, the last scene in the work of mercy for a guilty world. The temple is opened, and the second apartment of the sanctuary is entered. We know it is the holy of holies that is here opened, for the ark is seen, and in that apartment alone, the ark was deposited. This took place at the end of the 2300 days when the sanctuary was to be cleansed. (Daniel 8: 14.) At that time the prophetic periods ended, and the seventh angel began to sound. Since 1814, the people of God have seen by faith the open door in heaven and the ark of God's testament within. They are endeavoring to keep every precept of the holy law written upon the tables deposited there. That the tables of the law are there, just as they were in the ark in the sanctuary erected by Moses, is evident from the terms that John uses in describing the ark. He calls it the ark of His testament. The ark was called the Ark of the Covenant, or testament, because it was made for the express purpose of containing the tables of the testimony or Ten Commandments. (Exodus 25: 16, 31: 18; Deuteronomy 10: 2, 5.) It was put to no other use and owed its name solely to the fact that it contained the tables of the law. If it did not contain the tables, it would not be the ark of God's testament and could not truthfully be so-called. Yet John, beholding the ark in heaven under the sounding of the seventh trumpet, still calls it the ark of His testament, affording unanswerable proof that the law is still there, unaltered in one jot of title from the copy which for a time was committed to the care of men in the typical ark of the tabernacle during the time of Moses. The followers of the prophetic word have also received the reed and are measuring the temple, the altar, and those that worship therein. (Revelation 11: 1.) They are uttering their last prophecy before nations, peoples, and tongues. (Revelation 10: 11.) The drama will soon close with the lightning, thundering, voices, earthquake, and great hail, which will constitute nature's last convulsion before all things are made new at the close of the thousand years. (Revelation 21: 5.)